---
layout: post
title: Callbacks &amp; I/O
class: io
date: 2015-01-09
---

We talked about callbacks on day 1, but today we're going to really sink our teeth into them. We'll also get into input/output (I/O) operations, one of the places where Node makes heavy use of callbacks.

## Callbacks

Let's start with an example. We'll try to write some code for baking a cake. Here's a starting place.

{% highlight javascript %}
// prep work
var oven = require('oven');
oven.preheat('350deg');

// make the cake batter
var batter = mix(['flour', 'eggs', 'butter']);
var pan = {
  type: 'pan',
  diameter: '9in',
  shape: 'round'
};
var cake = pour(pan, batter);

// bake the cake
oven.addItem(cake);
oven.setTimer('30min');
oven.removeItem(cake);

// frost the cake
var frosting = mix(['sugar', 'butter']);
decorate(cake, frosting);
{% endhighlight %}

As it stands, this code won't allow us to accomplish our goal of baking a cake the way people usually do it. Let's implement some of these functions to get an idea of why that is.

### Result

We needed to use callbacks to properly write this code. The resulting code becomes:

{% highlight javascript %}
// prep work
var oven = require('oven');
oven.preheat('350deg');

// make the cake batter
var batter = mix(['flour', 'eggs', 'butter']);
var pan = {
  type: 'pan',
  diameter: '9in',
  shape: 'round'
};
var cake = pour(pan, batter);
var frosting = null;

// bake the cake
oven.addItem(cake);
oven.setTimer('30min', function() {
  oven.removeItem(cake);
  decorate(cake, frosting);
});

// frost the cake
frosting =  mix(['sugar', 'butter', 'cocoa powder']);
{% endhighlight %}

A _callback_ is the generic term for a function that's passed as an argument to another function, usually a long running operation. The callback function will be called once the long running operation completes.

### Test Driven Development

Mocha is designed to work well out of the box with callback-based, or _asynchronous_, functions. Every time you write a test with `it`, you can provide an additional argument to your function, usually called `done`. `done` is a function that you should call once everything has been completed. That means you can call it from your callback.

Let's clear out the definition of `oven.setTimer` and write a few tests, make sure that they fail, and work out the definition of `oven.setTimer` again.

{% highlight javascript %}
describe('oven.setTimer()', function() {
  it('calls the callback', function(done) {
    oven.setTimer('0s', done);
  });
});
{% endhighlight %}

### Challenges

Don't forget to use Git and TDD.

- Write a function, `setReminder(date, callback)` that will execute the callback at the given time. You'll need [`setTimeout`][node-settimeout] and [dates][mdn-dates]. There's also an [MDN page on `setTimeout`][mdn-settimeout].
- Create a stopwatch that counts to `10` using `setTimeout`.
- Create a stopwatch that counts to `10` using `setReminder`.
- Use [Lo-Dash][lodash], specifically [`_.range`][lodash-range], and `_.forEach` to create a stopwatch that counts to `10`. Try implementing this with both `setTimeout` directly and also with your `setReminder` function.
- **Advanced:** Make `setReminder` use strings instead of a date object, so you can type `tomorrow at 3pm` or `noon`. This is called _natural language processing_. Truly generic _natural language processing_ is very difficult to implement, so start by setting some rules about what sort of natural-language text your program will accept.

## I/O

### Jargon

I/O is short for Input/output. This has meanings in both computer hardware and software. I/O in software generally refers to communication with hardware devices, mice, keyboards, monitors, hard drives, etc.

<aside>
Accessing files via the <em>file system</em> is one form of I/O. Because accessing files is probably the most common form of I/O, you will hear the term I/O used when someone is just referring to work they're doing with files.
</aside>

### Speed

I/O is slow. It may not feel that way to you, but to a computer it's _orders of magnitude_ slower than the code you've written so far. The difference is about the same as the difference between the speed at which a baby crawls and the speed of a fighter jet.

What does this mean to you?

It means we shouldn't wait for the I/O. We should continue doing whatever we can while I/O happens. We use callbacks!

### Reading Files

Here's how you [read a file][node-readfile]:

{% highlight javascript %}
var fs = require('fs');

fs.readFile('./path/to/file', { encoding: 'utf8' }, function(err, contents) {
  console.log(contents);
});
{% endhighlight %}

#### And now, a tangent!

_UTF-8_ is a string encoding. That certainly made it a lot clearer. Computers work with zeros and ones. You've certainly heard that before. These are called _bits_. Eight bits make up a _byte_. So one byte could be something like `01100001`. Strings are actually just sequences of characters, right? Well each character is backed by these zeros and ones somehow. Sometimes each character is represented by a single byte, and there's a one-to-one mapping between bytes and characters. The standardized mapping used to do this is called ASCII. The letter `a`, for instance, is represented by the byte `01100001`, and `b` by the byte `01100010` (if you've never counted in binary, that's just `01100001 + 00000001`). It works okay, but has limitations&mdash;in particular, it can only encode English text.

One byte is only able to represent 256 (2^8) different options. If you start mapping out all of the characters you need to represent all of the languages of the world (plus the emoji), you'll realize you run out pretty quickly. In fact ASCII only uses 7 bits per character. So it can only represent 128 characters. That's not a lot. The Unicode standard was introduced to address this limitation.

There are a few common _encodings_ used with Unicode. They are UTF-8, UTF-16, and UTF-32. Each of these specifies the number of bits that it uses by default. UTF-8 is 8 bits (or 1 byte). UTF-16 is 16 bits (or 2 bytes). UTF-32 is 32 bits (or 4 bytes). You can read up on them independently, but the main thing to know is that UTF-8 is the dominant encoding that supports all of the world's languages.

* UTF-8 is a variable-length encoding that's backwards-compatible with ASCII. What this means is that you can read ASCII-encoded files by pretending they're UTF-8. "Variable-length encoding" means that the number of bytes per character varies depending on the character being encoded. Variable-length encodings are somewhat slower to work with in certain circumstances.
* UTF-16 is variable-width as well (either 2 or 4 bytes), but incompatible with ASCII. Don't use it unless you have to.
* UTF-32 is fixed-width. That means every character is represented by 4 bytes. This results certain files being four times larger than UTF-8, but has the advantage that you know the 2,000th character starts at the 8,000th byte (`2000*4`). Unlike UTF-8 and UTF-16, you don't have to read the first 2,000 characters to know if any of them are represented by multiple bytes. This _random access_ to characters is only needed in specific applications.

Unicode characters are often represented in hexadecimal, so `a` in UTF-8 is `0x96`, `z` is `0x7a`, and &#128169; is `0xf09f92a9`.

Why does all of this matter? When you write code that receives user input, you either need to specify that the input must be a certain encoding or will need to consider the possibility that the input could be encoded with any encoding. These are the common encodings, but since the history of computers goes back pretty far, there are some older encodings, some failed encodings, and some platform-specific encodings that exist. If you've been using the Internet for a while, you've probably seen garbled text in emails or comments. This usually happens when someone sends text in one encoding, but your computer displays it in a different one, for one reason or another. This problem occurs much less often now that browsers have gotten much better about indicating the encoding they've sent.

Let's watch [this YouTube video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MijmeoH9LT4) that explains UTF-8.

### Project

Write a program that takes two arguments, the paths to two different text files. The program should output all of the words that are used in both files.

<aside class="objective">
{% highlight bash %}
$ ./shared-words --help

  Usage: shared-words [options] <file1> <file2>

  Options:

    -h, --help     output usage information
    -V, --version  output the version number
    -n, --number   Report just the number of words
    -v, --verbose  Be more verbose,
                   report timing information

$ ./shared-words file1.txt file2.txt
programming
code
node
javascript

$ ./shared-words --number file1.txt file2.txt
4 words in common

$ ./shared-words -n -v words1.txt words2.txt
[time] read the files: 3ms
[time] word comparison: 9ms
435 words in common.
{% endhighlight %}
</aside>

## Benchmarking I/O

We talked about speed earlier, and we know that reading files can be slow. Let's analyze the performance of the code that we're writing now, though. How can we do this?

{% highlight javascript %}
var time = function(name) {
  var start = Date.now();
  return function() {
    console.log('[time] %s: %dms', name, Date.now() - start);
  };
};

var done = time('reading file');
fs.readFile('path/to/file', function(err, buffer) {
  done();
});
{% endhighlight %}

Analyze the performance of both reading the files as well as the code that figures out which words are shared. See which takes longer. Don't include the actual logging of shared words in how long it takes. Just the part that figures out which words are shared.

How long does your program take to compare the words [here][github-jsi-words]? It will depend on the speed of your computer, but it should be less than 100ms.

If you've got some extra time, add an option to write the files to a file instead of to the terminal.

### Discussing Performance

Programmers often use [Big O notation][big-o] to discuss the _running time_ of algorithms. A full CS course would discuss it in depth, but in the interest of a shared vocabulary, you should understand the basics of Big O so that when someone says, <q>the running time of that algorithm is N squared, so we need to find a better solution,</q> you understand what they're talking about.

There's a good [beginner's guide][big-o-beginner] that explains the basics.

[node-readfile]: http://nodejs.org/api/fs.html#fs_fs_readfile_filename_options_callback
[node-settimeout]: http://nodejs.org/api/timers.html#timers_settimeout_callback_delay_arg
[mdn-dates]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Date
[mdn-settimeout]: https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Window.setTimeout

[lodash]: http://lodash.com
[lodash-range]: http://lodash.com/docs#range
[lodash-foreach]: http://lodash.com/docs#forEach

[big-o]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Big_O_notation
[big-o-beginner]: http://rob-bell.net/2009/06/a-beginners-guide-to-big-o-notation/

[github-jsi-words]: https://github.com/portlandcodeschool/jsi-words
