---
layout: post
title: Sudoku Solver
class: sudoku
date: 2015-06-16
---

Over the next few days, we're going to build an application that solves Sudoku puzzles.

## Approach

We need to approach this problem slowly.

When you tackle big problems, if you start writing code right away, you won't be focusing on solving the problem. You'll be so distracted by the code, that you'll lose track of what you're even doing. Plus, you'll write code that's not needed.

Here are some guidelines that will help keep you on track:

* Start on paper. The lo-tech environment helps keep the focus on the problem at hand.
* Write pseudo-code for solving the problem.
* Discuss whether or not the ideas in the pseudo-code will work.
* Go to the computer, write some code.
* Think about what functionality you need for your pseudo-code to work.
* Implement essential small pieces using TDD.
* Work on building medium/large pieces (using TDD) to get closer to the pseudo-code you wrote.
* If you get stuck, return to paper to discuss.


## Input

You should create a `Sudoku` class that can be instantiated with a single argument, the board. The board will be a string formed by reading the numbers of the board from the top left across, then continuing with the next row. Periods represent unsolved cells.

For instance:

```
'158.2..6.2...8..9..3..7.8.2.6.74......4.6.7......19.5.4.9.3..2..2..5...8.7..9.413'
```

will produce the following board and solution:

    +---------+---------+---------+    +---------+---------+---------+
    | 1  5  8 |    2    |    6    |    | 1  5  8 | 9  2  4 | 3  6  7 |
    | 2       |    8    |    9    |    | 2  4  7 | 6  8  3 | 1  9  5 |
    |    3    |    7    | 8     2 |    | 9  3  6 | 1  7  5 | 8  4  2 |
    +---------+---------+---------+    +---------+---------+---------+
    |    6    | 7  4    |         |    | 5  6  1 | 7  4  8 | 2  3  9 |
    |       4 |    6    | 7       |    | 3  9  4 | 5  6  2 | 7  8  1 |
    |         |    1  9 |    5    |    | 7  8  2 | 3  1  9 | 6  5  4 |
    +---------+---------+---------+    +---------+---------+---------+
    | 4     9 |    3    |    2    |    | 4  1  9 | 8  3  7 | 5  2  6 |
    |    2    |    5    |       8 |    | 6  2  3 | 4  5  1 | 9  7  8 |
    |    7    |    9    | 4  1  3 |    | 8  7  5 | 2  9  6 | 4  1  3 |
    +---------+---------+---------+    +---------+---------+---------+

The code should work something like this:

```JavaScript
var game = new Sudoku(str);
game.solve();
```

## Initial Solution

Your initial Sudoku solver will not solve all puzzles. It should only fill in cells when the basic rules narrow the possibilities for that cell down to one number.

Don't worry about complex boards or trying to make it solve every puzzle. You don't want your solver to be _smart_ just yet. If you're unsure if you're creating something that's too smart or not, just ask.

## Mindset

Over the course of this project, you'll probably experience huge swings in your emotional state and attitude toward the problem you're solving. It will be fun. It will be challenging. It will be rewarding. It will feel impossible. You'll get stuck. You'll feel angry. You'll question why you're working on such a silly problem, why you're even trying to learn how to be a programmer. You'll feel like an impostor. You'll solve a small piece of the problem and you'll feel elated, on top of the world, like you can solve anything. Then you'll cycle back around again.

Keep a positive mindset. When you feel the frustration coming on, take a break. Step away from the computer. Go for a walk. Get some sleep.

Hard problems are best solved by teams. You and your teammates will provide different views and ideas, different ways of looking at the problem. Explore all ideas. Keep your teammates on track and thinking positively.

## Advice

Your development path should have 3 stages.  For today, concentrate on Stage 1 (Representation).

### Stage 1: Representation

The first phase of development is to develop a representation (or "model") of the game.  It will be an interconnected family of objects (including Arrays) which stores not only the visible state of the puzzle (i.e. the numbers which have already been filled in) but also any clues and partial solutions you've been able to deduce.

The objects in your data model should include methods to answer various types of questions.  For example:

* Which squares have known digits?

* How many squares remain with unknown digits?

* What is the known digit, if any, of a given square?

* What are the known digits in a given Row? Column? 3x3 Block?

* How much uncertainty remains in a given square?  In the game overall?


Hints:

You should probably define three different classes of object:
Game, Cell, Group (i.e. row/col/block).  Make a constructor for each, and consider implementing their instance methods with prototypes.

Rows, columns, and 3x3 blocks all have exactly the same role in the game rules; therefore they should preserve that symmetric role in the code.  Try to write a single class which can represent any of the three groupings and share the same code.

Use built-in functions and libraries whenever possible to avoid writing low-level code.
You'll probably want to include _lodash_ for several useful array-comparing functions-- especially `_.union()` and `_.difference()`


### Stage 2: Reasoning

There are two basic strategies: 

* _Deduction_: eliminating certain possibilities (maybe all but one) in squares

* _Guess & Test_: try certain values in squares, do some deduction, and see if the implications either solve the game or lead to impossibility.

In general, you can use these strategies together: 
do some initial deduction, then make some guesses, then deduce the implications of those guesses, and so on.

### Stage 3: Efficiency

When you've made some progress in Reasoning and are able to solve about 50% of games completely, you might begin to think about efficiency.  For example: are you computing the same values multiple times?  Is there an opportunity for cacheing?  Are you constantly re-checking squares which can't have changed since you checked before?

