---
layout: post
title: jQuery Day 2&#58; Websockets!
date: 2015-05-22
---

## Websockets

One of the most exciting features in modern browsers is the ability to use _websockets_, a protocol for real-time two-way communication between a client and a server. The server can send data to the browser as it becomes available, which allows for nifty things like push notifications and chat applications.

## WebSocket Communications From The Browser

Receiving a websocket message looks a lot like receiving an XMLHTTPRequest response:

```JavaScript
  var socket = new WebSocket("ws://localhost:3000/");

  socket.addEventListener('message', function(message) {
    console.log("Got a message from the server: ");
    console.log(message);
  });
```

You can also send data to the server:

```JavaScript
  var socket = new WebSocket("ws://localhost:3000/");

  socket.send('here is a message for the server!');
```

Notice that unlike AJAX communications, sending messages and receiving messages are completely uncoupled from each other.

## WebSocket Communications From The Server

If you want your client to be able to make a websocket connection to your server, you server must be ready to serve websocket connections. We'll do this with the [`ws`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/ws) NPM package.

You can interact with `ws` much as you do with browsers' WebSocket implementation, although of course there are some subtle differences. Particularly, unlike clients, which have only one server to talk to, a server will have multiple clients. Thus, you have to pay more attention to the `connect` event.

This server code will forward any message it receives to all of its clients:

```JavaScript
var app = express();
var server = http.createServer(app);

var wss = new WebSocketServer({server: server});
wss.on('connection', function(connection) {
    connection.on('message', function(message) {
        wss.clients.forEach(function (client) {
            client.send(message);
        });
    });
});
```

### Exercise: A Chat Application

To practice using WebSockets (as well as manipulating the DOM with jQuery), let's build a little chatroom! There's an [existing repo](https://github.com/portlandcodeschool-jsi/barebones-chat) that you should fork and clone to get started.

Once you have a chat server working, you'll be able to share it with your classmates by having them browse to your IP on the local classroom network. On OSX you can run:

```
ifconfig -l | tr ' ' '\n' | xargs -I{} ipconfig getifaddr {}
```

On Linux, instead use:

```
hostname -I
```

Then send your IP to your classmates and they can browse to http://&lt;your IP address&gt;:3000 and start chattin!
