---
layout: post
title: MongoDB 1
class: mongo
date: 2015-06-10
---

## MongoDB

Mongo is one of a growing number of "NoSQL databases:" key-value or document stores that provide provide reasonably strong durability guarantees, without the difficult schema design problems presented by relational databases. Values in Mongo are _documents_: essentially a JSON object.

<aside>
***Horizontal Scaling***

One of the most compelling features offered by NoSQL databases is _horizontal scaling_: spreading data across multiple virtual or physical database servers. If you find that you need better database performance, you can add new servers to your cluster, rather than having to migrate your database to a new larger server. Adding new servers typically requires little or no downtime.

Horizontal scaling presents its own problems, however. When data is updated, the update needs to be reflected across all nodes ("consistency"). If a node or group of nodes becomes unavailable, the system as a whole must retain the ability to respond to requests ("availability"). Finally, if a node or group of nodes becomes unavailable, the system needs to resolve any conflicting data that arises ("partition tolerance").

The oft-quoted _CAP theorem_ states that no system can provide solid guarantees for more than two of these at a time. Mongo, unfortunately, provides only availability, with the caveat that writes that occur during or just before a network partition may be lost.
</aside>

## Documents

Documents in Mongo are _BSON_ ("Binary JSON"): an extension to JSON that adds dates and binary blobs as data types. The binary blobs are particularly useful, as you'd have to use string escaping to store, say, image contents in JSON. The similary of BSON to JavaScript objects makes for a fairly natural conversion from application data to the database.

Mongo documents have a flexible schema. A document can have any fields you want, and the fields can have any type of value. Thus there's no need for migrations of any sort--if you need a document to have new fields, just save the changes!

## Collections

Mongo documents live inside _collections_, which are roughly analogous to a table in a relational database. Much as documents' fields can be added as needed, there's no need to predefine a collection--simply start inserting into it and it'll have data.

### Exercise: simple MongoDB interactions

1. Install MongoDB with `brew install mongodb`. Remember to run the after-install commands to get the server running!  One such option is
`mongod --config /usr/local/etc/mongod.conf`
1. Before using `npm install`, you'll need to have command-line developer tools installed.
  * On Macs: `xcode-select --install`. To determine whether you already have dev tools, first try `pkgutil --pkg-info=com.apple.pkg.CLTools_Executables` or `xcode-select -p`
  * On Ubuntu: `sudo apt-get install gcc make build-essential`
1. In a new or existing project, install the mongodb Node package with `npm install --save mongodb`.
1. Examine the code below to see what it does. Save it as a `.js` file and make sure it runs successfully.

{%highlight javascript%}
var MongoClient = require('mongodb').MongoClient;

MongoClient.connect('mongodb://127.0.0.1:27017/test', function(err, db) {
  if (err) {
    throw err;
  }

  var collection = db.collection('test_insert');
  collection.insert({a:2}, function(err, docs) {

    collection.count(function(err, count) {
      console.log("count = %s", count);
    });

    collection.find().toArray(function(err, results) {
      console.dir(results);
      db.close();
    });
  });
});
{%endhighlight%}

## Cursors

The Node Mongo library provides easy access to _cursors_: objects that you can start iterating over before all data has been returned. If an array is a cart that brings you all your data at once, a cursor is a conveyor belt that can start bringing you data as soon as some of it is ready. The code above uses a cursor's `toArray` method, but you can instead use `each`:

{%highlight javascript%}
collection.find().each(function(err, document) {
  console.log(document);
})
{%endhighlight%}

### Exercise: URL Shortener

Today and tomorrow we'll work on a URL shortener built in Express, using Mongo as a backend. A URL shortener has a few features:

* You can enter a URL and get back a short version of it.
* If you go to the short URL, you're redirected to the original long url.
* There's a page where you can see stats for the URL: number of times visited, most recent visit, etc.

Each URL will be a document that looks something like this:

{%highlight javascript%}
{
  "_id": "atnherjgrdkgdr",
  "shortened": "bbb",
  "target": "https://google.com",
  "clicks": 8,
  "last_click": "2015-01-13T16:42:00"
}
{%endhighlight%}

You'll need a few request handlers:

{%highlight javascript%}
router.get('/', function(request, response) {
  response.render('index', {});
  // index.jade needs a form to submit a URL for shortening
});

router.post('/', function(request, response) {
  var collection = db.collection('urls');
  collection.insert({/*info you generate*/}, function(err, docs) {
    response.redirect('/info/' + shortUrl);
  });
});

router.get('/info/:shortUrl', function(request, response) {
  var collection = db.collection('urls'),
      shortUrl = request.params.shortUrl;
  collection.find({'shortened': shortUrl}, function(err, url) {
    response.render('info', {url: url});
  });
});

router.get('/:shortUrl', function(request, response) {
  var collection = db.collection('urls'),
      shortUrl = request.params.shortUrl;
  collection.find({'shortened': shortUrl}, function(err, url) {
    response.redirect(url.target);
  });
});
{%endhighlight%}
